You're welcome to integrate PackSquash with your applications and scripts, as
long as you comply with the terms of its
[license](https://github.com/ComunidadAylas/PackSquash/blob/master/LICENSE). In
short, if you distribute your application alongside PackSquash, the license
requires disclosing PackSquash source code (even when used over a network) and
licensing your application under a compatible open source license. If in doubt,
please check out [this previous discussion about the
matter](https://github.com/ComunidadAylas/PackSquash/discussions/371), the [GNU
GPL licenses FAQ](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-faq.en.html), or ask us about
your intended usage of PackSquash. Even if you have no doubts, we'd love to hear
what kind of great things you're building, though!

With that disclaimer out of the way, there are several ways to integrate with
PackSquash.

## Executing its binary directly as an external OS process

This way is not the most performant and doesn't allow for sophisticated
communication or workflows that involve the two components. But it has an easier
learning curve, as it boils down to executing PackSquash as an end-user would.

Please keep in mind that _any_ change to outputs generated by PackSquash,
including the strings it prints to the standard output and error streams, is not
considered a breaking change for versioning purposes. In other words, you should
not assume that PackSquash will keep its outputs constant for otherwise
compatible versions.

A well-documented toy example that shows how to use PackSquash from a Java
application with this approach is
[here](https://gist.github.com/AlexTMjugador/7049bdecfe94c893c457d78084e0dfd6).
You should be able to translate it to other languages and environments without
much trouble.

## Using its Rust library, or an available FFI for your programming language

Work for this approach has been put on hold indefinitely due to its perceived
lack of benefits over running the PackSquash binary directly, concerns over
balancing semantic versioning requirements with the PackSquash development pace,
and the usage of nightly Rust. Depending on how these factors evolve, we are
open to changing our stance in the future. Please contact us if you are
interested in a library or FFI and find the binary unsatisfying for some reason.
